[Music]
we had men who felt there was a an
immediate danger to the country they
felt they had a responsibility to act
and having felt this responsibility did
[Music]
you
from Washington in fact presents a
special report on the United States
Senate investigation of the FBI now here
is in fact correspondent Paul Duke good
evening this was the FBI's day before
the Senate Intelligence Committee
associate deputy FBI director james
adams sat for three hours in the witness
chair answering a long series of
questions about the bureaus domestic
surveillance operation adams
acknowledged the agency went too far in
its efforts to destroy dr. martin luther
king he conceded there had been abuses
of constitutional rights at the agency
under j edgar Hoover had ventured into
questionable areas where it had no
business that there were instances of
unjustified persecution but Adams also
defended the FBI including part of its
investigation of dr. King saying it was
necessary to check on possible communist
influences and while conceding the
abuses he contended the vast majority of
FBI intelligence and counterintelligence
work has been legal at the same time
Adams repeatedly pleaded for Congress to
lay down new legal guidelines for the
agency spelling out in specific language
just what the FBI's intelligence
function is and should be tonight here
on public television will again give you
the highlights of the testimony and the
questioning afterward will round out the
day's development with a discussion
featuring the observations of Nicholas
Horrocks investigative reporter for The
New York Times and Sanford under
Washington editor for The Atlantic
Monthly whose book on the FBI will be
published soon from the opposite from
the offset today it was plain that much
of the interrogation would revolve
around the committee's disclosures
yesterday of the attempts to discredit
dr. King and a census campaign that was
waged over a seven-year spans the hand
of Hoover was everywhere in the
harassment of dr. King Adams told of 25
separate acts acknowledging there was no
legal basis for any of them as we pick
up the proceedings Adams is being
questioned about an anónimo
letter sent to dr. King in 1954 shortly
before he received the nobel peace prize
a letter would some suggest was an
attempt to induce suicide democratic
chairman frank Church quoted directly
from the letter especially from the
letter King there is only one thing left
for you to do you know what it is you
have just 34 days in which to do this
exact number has been selected for a
specific reason it has definite
practical significance you are done
there is but one way out for you
now if you had received such a letter
[Music]
how would you have interpreted that what
would you have thought it meant i have
read that statement i have heard the
conclusions of your staff that it was a
suicide urging i can't find any basis
upon which they drew that conclusion I
think that approaching it from an
objective standpoint as I read it I
don't know what it means I could I think
rather than a conclusion it should be a
speculation in a realm of possibilities
as to what was intended but i cannot i
don't understand the basis before it's a
possibility but i certainly would not
reach such a conclusion for my reading
of the hours you had received the letter
of this kind and and that has been
directed to you when you were in in dr.
King's position and you read King there
is only one thing left for you to do you
know what it is you have just 34 days in
which to do it now that happens to
roughly correspond to the time before
which he was to receive the Nobel Peace
Prize
what we do things that matter I would
have to consider what I was being
accused of I would have to consider what
the facts were i would have to consider
what the intent of the person was
writing such a note coming just before
Christmas I don't know if it means if an
urging to repent from something this
person whoever he was extended I have no
idea whether certainly no Christmas card
is it certainly no Christmas card it
read you are done there is but one way
out for you what does that mean I don't
know I don't know if it means confession
I don't know if it means suicide that
has been ways I have no idea you have
the statement I'm not in a position to
to say I haven't interviewed anyone that
was with him at the time he received
there would you just would you disown
this statement and say that any
connection the FBI had with it was
utterly improper and grotesque I
certainly would say it was improper and
I can't justify its being prepared are
sent yes sir I gather that there was no
never any question raised about whether
dr. King was a comment that was never
charged not at a communist party man
right now that's right never remember or
that he was about or had committed acts
of violence no but the the peg for
investigating was apparently that he was
subject to come this influence yes now
what what makes that a justified reason
for investigating is it is it a crime to
be approached by someone who's a
communist know what is the legal basis
for an investigation the basis would be
the Communist influence on him and the
effect it would have on the organization
[Music]
would be in connection with our basic
investigation of the Communist Party
well I'm as I understand the law today
if it is not a crime to be a member of
the Communist Party that's correct how
can it be a crime to know someone who is
a member of the Communist Party it
hasn't well then how do you investigate
something as tenuous is that what is the
basis for it legally well if it falls
into the area of one the intelligence
jurisdiction of the activities of the
Communist Party you have a situation
where an individual in an organization a
leader of an organization efforts are
being made to influence them and achieve
control over the organization and it's
part of the overall investigation of the
party trying to exert this influence as
two are they successful are they taking
over the black movement or the civil
rights movement is it look like we try
to make clear in investigations that
were more prevalent years ago but still
occur in communist influence and labor
unions we try to tell everybody we
interview we're not interested in labor
matters we're not trying to inquire into
that we're interested in the effect of
the Communist Party warmish Union mr.
ounce I'm trying to get at the legal
basis in this particular case of
investigating dr. King on the grounds
that he might be subject to come this
influence can you cite any legal basis
for that or is it based entirely upon a
generalized authority thought to exist
in the FBI to investigate quote internal
security matters it was all also in the
crowd essential directive
investigating subversive activities and
then the question would return to what
authority the President had that's right
to such noted now the dr. King was
investigated among other things are for
matters of i think you call it delicacy
would that be a basis for investigating
that american citizen by the FBI had no
would you say then that those
investigations were improper i I don't
believe that there is an allegation that
we investigated him for that I think
there were certain byproducts of
information that developed and I think
that at a point you had a situation
where the tail was wagging the dog
perhaps but I don't see any basis for
such investigation and I I find it very
difficult to get into a discussion of
this in view of it but the prohibitions
that I think we well you answer my
question that by itself would not be a
basis no just so their heart
it is right that the committee and the
press be worried about the treatment of
a Nobel Prize winner dr. King were an
awful lot of people who never got close
to a Nobel Prize whose name is Jones and
Smith that my review of file she had
violence done to their First Amendment
life and
Nobel Prize winners will always get
protection but yo potatoes doesn't this
committee should focus on into now
included in this colon tell were
activities like this anonymous letters
drafted by bureau offices in the field
sent to headquarters in Washington
approved and then put in the mail
intended to break up marriages not of
dr. King but a Marian Jon Jones because
one or other was thought to be a all
descended might have dressed strangely
or showed up at meeting in the company
of others who dressed strangely
[Music]
anonymous letters to university
officials and to the several newspapers
in that city to prevent university
facilities from being made available to
a speaker's home the bureau disapproved
and it wasn't a top-flight big-name
speaker
[Music]
in that case an anonymous letter was
sent to me making protest as an
anonymous letter had never occurred to
me that it came from the Federal Bureau
of Investigation he has
series of anonymous letters one with the
spelling very poor of the grammar sloppy
and another more sophisticated
protesting the employment by a city of a
man alleging that he was a communist it
came from a communist family and there
are loyal Americans out of work and what
are you doing mayor and to the press
isn't this an outrage and again the love
an anonymous letter sent to me what are
you going to do about this they're loyal
Democrat didn't come out who need work
and in that case I happen to know I
happen to have known the man about whom
the protesters made and the bureau's
facts were wrong as hell on them on that
man's loyal but he was as loyally you
are now
[Music]
I
yes or no are those actions regarded now
by the viewer as with inbound no sir why
were they regarded as within bounds when
they were approved by the future well I
think even under the guidelines of
COINTELPRO as established the programs
were not designed for the purpose of
harassment of an individual the
memoranda indicate they are designed to
disrupt the organization some of the
turn downs were turned down on the
specific wording this is near harassment
the rationale would have been and of
course here I say some of these you've
mentioned wouldn't even appear to me to
meet the criteria of the program and
should have been disavowed even under
the existence of the program however in
the total context of the program
activities were to be directed towards
the organization itself but we do not do
that at the present time but everything
I've summarized rather poorly was
approved by the Bureau at the con by
headquarters not filled all the things I
do think that the there were improper
actions taken under the program even
even under the program as it existed mr.
Kelly has so stated his recognition of
that fact the Attorney General certainly
has yes the majority of the actions
taken even the department's included
were lawful and legal proper
investigative activities but my feeling
is that in the question of techniques
Abed the concept of the program seems to
give do violence the First Amendment
because everything that you did sought
to silence some money or frighten
somebody in the silent or deny somebody
a platform
or create a an atmosphere in which
people were where in fact afraid to
assemble now sometimes law enforcement
legitimate law enforcement has what we
call this chilling effect when it's
legitimate law enforcement often times
that chilling effect is a necessary the
regrettable side effect but what I
talking about and what these files are
full of our actions the only purpose of
which is to chill hearts concern hearts
concern reflected the committee's
concern that the FBI has systematically
disregarded constitutional rights of
individuals much of this concern is
directed at the agency's so-called Cohen
Perl program a counterintelligence
operation whereby the FBI over a 15-year
period from nineteen fifty six to
nineteen seventy one conducted a dozen
separate programs of infiltration and
harassment seven of these involved
domestic groups and organizations such
as militant black sand new left
political leaders j edgar hoover
approved the cohen tell operations which
included a wide variety of tactics
break-ins wiretaps anonymous mailings
dissemination of false information and
the use of informers to disrupt meetings
and other activities the Senators
pressed Adams for his views on the legal
justification for core Intel Republican
John power of Texas led the questioning
and trying to find out more about the
operation he's been amazing he's been
familiar with the bureaus domestic
intelligence work for many years how did
the bureau come to launch the Cohen tell
program and what in essence could go and
tell pro account
well the program has such as I can
reconstruct from the files was indicated
to concern over the conspiratorial
efforts of certain groups and an attempt
to a decision made that perhaps more
affirmative action should be taken to
neutralize violence which was becoming a
more concern to the FBI in that regard I
believe these are some of the basic
considerations that went into the
launching of COINTELPRO now as far as
the first one which was a communist
party of course there was a concern here
to neutralize the effectiveness of the
Communist Party in the United States in
fact out of all the cointelpro
operations that were approved fifty-nine
percent of them were directed at the
communist party the bulk of the concern
and initially was with the communist
party and it was a desire to create
factionalism within the communist party
and try to neutralize its efforts the
Communist Party Congress itself Bob
still has a determination on the record
as to the threat of a communist party in
the statute the Supreme Court head has
held that the Communist Party is an
instrument of the Soviet Union the
Soviet Union certainly has not
relinquished its interest in the United
States as a target all of these
considerations went into should we do
something not only to follow the
activities of the Communist Party but
should we destroy its effectiveness in
the United States that was the first
program i believe it was michigan now
does it do to everything now there's a
beaut oh every seek direction or
counselor from the attorney general law
on any vehicle intel pro efforts or
specific program as best as I can which
bus complete construct senator be there
was no direct authority requested from
any attorney general for the initiation
of these programs and it's only a
question as your staff presented
yesterday that the Attorney General's
President Congress had been made
available a certain aspects of programs
after the fact and those were primarily
concerned with the Communist Party in
one other organization but not the new
left and these other type so I cannot
find any evidence that and I have no
reason to believe there would be any
evidence that the bureau initiated these
programs other than has an internal
decision well we're reports on these
programs made to the Attorney General
was the informed of them was he kept
informal and continuing basis he was
just informed by letters which again the
staff has an alluded two letters
reporting certain developments for
instance one of them it went to one
attorney general reading of that letter
outlined almost in complete detailed
Klan activities activities taken to
disrupt the clan it was a youth terms of
neutralized disrupt there was a clear
explanation of what we were doing
against the Klan in that regard oh hi is
that you oh how is it that you came to
believe that you had the authority to
utilize or disrupt these organizations
rather than proceed against the frontal
is through prosecuting them for low
violation I guess you would have to say
in a position like this that it's just
like the Smith Act of 1940 which is
designed to prevent revolutionary groups
from advocating the older two of the
government in
subsequent interpretations as to the
constitutionality of it leaves us with a
statute still on the books that
prescribe certain actions but get the
degree of proof necessary to operate
under the few remaining areas if such
that there was no satisfactory way to
proceed and it was an area where the
term of yield effect at that point
please what you're saying with the one
all is because of the ground excuse me
is that you didn't operate within the
law because the law didn't give you
sufficient lighting therefore you
undertook a direct action to disrupt and
otherwise undermine these organizations
did you proceed on the assumption that
uh that these organizations would
eventually break the law and therefore
you thought neutralized disrupting
before they did I can't say that sir I
think that they the investigations of
them were based on this belief that they
might break the law they were breaking
the law the disruptive activities I
can't find where we were able to relate
it to that what it boils down to is what
we've gotten into question before on
this in our review of the situation we
see men of the FBI recognizing or having
a good faith belief that there was an
immediate danger to the United States
all right but the repair two hundred
churches questions you don't say that
you really had specific legal authority
for this no and this is this is the hang
up with a whole program and which we are
not trying to justify that there's some
statutory basis I wouldn't make that
effort whatsoever what I'm all I'm
trying to do is say that at the time it
was initiated we have
men who felt there was a an immediate
danger to the country they felt they had
a responsibility to act and adding felt
this responsibility did act and this is
the whole problem we have at the present
time because we do have one we can see
good evidence of their belief there was
a threat we had cities being burned we
have educational institutions being
bombed we had deaths occurring from all
of these activities we have a situation
that we didn't know what the end was
going to be we never can look around the
corner in intelligence operations we
don't know if ultimately this might
bring the destruction of the country all
we know is we have a an extremely
violent time so I don't find any basis
in my mind to argue with their good
faith belief they were faced with a
danger now when they move over to this
second area of responsibility here's
where we have the problem and I think
it's the whole purpose of this committee
the Attorney General mr. Kelly all of us
realizing we can't operate in these
areas where we feel a responsibility but
we don't have a mandate by Congress so
in that area in that area this feeling
of responsibility I feel team from the
fact that presidents as your staff said
yesterday president congressman the
Attorney General no one really provided
direction and guiding for instructions
don't do this do this don't do that or
what are you doing and how are you doing
Clinton there is some feeling in the on
the court of some that our whole
domestic intelligence operations were
secret the cointelpro operations want I
mean I think we all agreed that this was
to be effective they felt it should be
secret but
back in our this is plenty of
appropriation testimony which went to
the members of the committee have mailed
out the newspapers friends anyone that
was interested in it back in nineteen
seventy talking about our internal
security operation the new left movement
young socialist alliance chicago trial
nationwide demonstrations student
education anti-war activities then
famous brigade committee of return
volunteers Communist Party USA
productive labor 40 Socialist Workers
Party extremist organization Black
Panther Party all of these items and
statements about our extremist white
extremist in haste tight groups Republic
of new Afrika Minutemen our coverage of
subversive organizations the several
groups organizations and movements which
I discussed show the wide coverage we
must maintain to follow on their
activities in changing tactics in spite
of the proliferation of these
organizations our informant coverage at
all levels has been a great value and
assistance in enabling us to keep
abreast of our investigative
responsibility this is the same way
through all of our public appropriation
testimony we've told the world we're
investigating black youth groups new
left groups so I merely mention this to
try to put in the frame of reference of
these men feelings they know we're
investigating them they didn't tell them
both in sufficient detail or other than
scandal II before the Appropriations
Committee what we were doing to disrupt
these activities and my feeling is that
the men recognize the danger they
pointed out the danger to the world they
said we're investigating these
organizations and they felt then that
the comfortable climate have leave it up
to the FBI we should do something more
and that's what we're looking for
guidelines on the Attorney General mr.
Kelly you
that give us the guidelines under which
we should operate now there are certain
guidelines that we don't need to be
given we shouldn't do this we don't have
such activities today programs designed
to disrupt or neutralize in the domestic
intelligence field but beyond that we
need guidelines on what does the whole
of Congress representative of the people
by passing of legislation say this is
the FBI's role in domestic intelligence
and that's mr. chairman my time is long
term expired i would like to note that i
assault mr. Kelly on the Today show this
morning indicating strong support for
responsible congressional oversight
night yes that's a that's a healthy
attitude why do they ask you well I
think it must come because as you have
really treated you shouldn't have ever
had to have has guidelines to tell you
that the federal government's chief law
enforcement agency ought not to disobey
the law and really you don't need
explicit guideline tell you that or you
shouldn't have wouldn't you agree i
would say that looking at it today we
should have looked at it that way
yesterday but I do feel that I don't
have any doubt about the good faith of
people recognizing a danger feeling they
have a responsibility no matter whose
fault it was ours internally or because
we weren't given the supervision we
should have been given and taking what
they considered appropriate action
Jackson
would you agree with me mr. Adams that
this whole big generalized area of the
assignment that have been at the FBI has
been passed and which they thought the
possessor of a years to investigate
Americans not where there are
allegations of crime or sufficient that
crimes are about to be committed or that
there's violence that violence this much
about to be committed but rather this
whole generalized area to investigate
Americans in terms of ideas that they
have or might be persuaded to have that
might hold potential for danger this
country is an exceedingly vague
difficult if not impossible define area
and an area which has gotten the FBI
into an awful lot of trouble including
today's hearing yes and because of that
there is a very important need to sit
down and redefine it have the guidelines
known specifically by law so that the
FBI can know precisely what it can do
and what it cannot do I think this is
why the country is fortunate at this
particular time to have an attorney
general who is a legal scholar and a
lawyer of unquestioned repute who have
indicated a willingness to address these
problems which as the staff is
determined was not always the case over
the years but they have an attorney
general we have a director who has
offered his complete cooperation just if
he has to the committee in this increase
that we're not trying to avoid
embarrassment the only thing we're
trying to hold back or identities of
informants and sensitive ongoing
operations and that we have a concern on
the part of Congress that
not only recognizes there have been
abusive but recognizes that they're
still always have to be some degree of
flexibility we're going to have
situations where you have a weatherman
working for the waterworks and in
college he was a scientist I mean a
scientific student and he makes a
comment that to a fellow employee that
[Music]
there's going to be some back
spectacular event occurring that's going
to bring the attention of the world on
this city well now wouldn't you have
probable cause them to investigate the
commission of occurs I have to
investigate but because we just do we
have the authority to tell the
supervisor of the waterworks you better
get him out of there before the city
water is poisoned in a hundred thousand
people dying and I think the committee
is going to find the same problem we do
in groping with that situation and even
the Attorney General in his speech in
Ottawa pointed out that there is still
possibly a necessity for some
flexibility stability Senate
Intelligence Committee and the highlight
of the highlights of today's testimony
by deputy associate FBI director james
adams let's turn now to our two resident
FBI experts sandy hunger and nicholas
hora gentlemen it seems to me that in
his testimony today threaded throughout
his testimony today McAdams really was
sounding a call for help he was saying
that you're very concerned about the way
the SVR has been operating about the
misdeeds the irregularities the abuses
well now tell us how you wish us to
operate give us some guidelines nick is
it possible for Congress to bringing
guidelines for the FBI to operate I'm
anxious just on the word guideline I
think we've got to reset for a minute we
are a nation of laws senator church made
a point today
mr. Mondale that there are laws to deal
with situation he uses the weatherman
example this is a man who is going to
poison the water there is probable cause
you can go to a US Attorney you can
bring that man in for questioning it's
very questionable whether you should
force them out of Employment and I think
it is important for us to figure out if
we can't operate within the law is now
existing and I think many members of
committee pls and there are some
operational guidance on who they should
investigate but not on what mr. Adam
suggests who we should disrupt I'm not
sure that's a matter for guidelines
that's against along the company's rusty
sandy it takes me guidelines become kind
of a code word call this justice hums
working on them with Congress says they
want to develop in the FBI says they
want them it seems to me that one of the
important things is to establish some
kind of system whereby somebody other
than the FBI is involved in deciding
whom the FBI is going to investigate now
as long as you have an intelligence
division of the FBI they're going to
sign subversive they're going to find
somebody to keep them busy and if they
unchecked with anybody at without anyone
else to consult our if it's up to them
to decide I'm concerned that today's
patriotism may appear tomorrow
subversion if there's nobody else to
investigate well are you suggesting that
the Justice Department for example
should provide more supervision well
some people are suggestion that there
should be saying inspector general the
Justice Department who reviews the
premises on which the FBI is operating I
think I think one of the problems that
flows out of what Nick was saying is
that if Congress starts writing very
specific guidelines that's getting too
specific about it there may be First
Amendment problems the Congress may be
saying maybe specifying activity which
should be investigated or speech which
should be investigated what Sunday if
you adopt your suggestion of having an
inspector general for example wouldn't
that man have awesome power and wouldn't
you be paving the way for some future j
edgar hoover oxford shoes but they let
it go so long
in fact maybe the Berlin FBI building
symbolic the FBI exceeds besides the
Justice Department in at our innocence
and missing giant building banta I think
the Justice Department has to take it
back into this original role there's an
investigative arm of the Department of
Justice the Department says there's a
crime and it must have investigated it
directly FBI to do so and I think the
attorney general ed and his successors
have got to bring that back into reality
they should serve the department how
effective was Adams of the witness was
the fourth right did he tell everything
he needs he's obviously not an
articulate man yes had a grasp if
somebody was doing he quite cleverly
deplore then and rejected the most
severe things that were going against
Martin Luther King which i think is
obviously important for him to do I
think there may be some other areas
where he was less than forthcoming and
must been candid I think that for
example to say that informants never
disrupt or never active as provocateurs
is to read the rules as the existing
hero as a matter of fact there are cases
open they use informants in Washington
to do a burglary and being sued for the
steel materials agents and other cities
of these informants to enter apartments
and place things and apartments and
we've very few of these cases he says a
few but I don't recall personally any
case where they prosecuted informative
them of their own I'm sure there are
some but they certainly don't stand out
in your mind why was he chosen to be
with the FBI spokesman and not be the
director of the FBI Clarence Kelly
they're probably few reasons for that so
Paul I don't think mr. Kelly has been
looking at these things in quite the
detail mr. Otto has I think there's
little politics too as you may know mr.
Kelly is before son of the reasons they
on terrorism you would not go off of his
terrorism presentation any questions on
this matter it's very strange that the
director of the FBI isn't before the
Church Committee and
that an underling I thought trust a lot
of people in the world Isaiah that maybe
Kelly had immediately avoided that that
problem and concern mr. Adams now
measure he wasn't I'm sure Kelly was not
eager to address some of these issues by
any means and I think that in many
respects in choosing Adams the Bureau is
putting it excessive forward that he is
a well-rehearsed well-practiced
congressional witness who does a pretty
good job at confinement senators he also
was a man who knew j edgar hoover rather
well and one of the inclusion things to
me at least was that he could not give
any real answer explaining Hoover's bias
toward Martin Luther King okay he said
on several occasions because would not
discuss the matter of motives now I
think there's probably several reasons
for that Nick and I may disagree about
it but I think one of them was that
Adams simply was not going to be put
into a position of criticizing J Edgar
Hoover publicly and I think there's no
secrets that mr. Adams is somebody who
would like one day to be director of the
FBI and one does not become director of
the FBI by publicly criticizing J Edgar
Hoover he is still a god to many people
mr. Allen he was a very interesting word
though and avoiding discussing this
question on Kenny user was badly and I
think that within the grill they felt
that Hoover's feelings about King and
possibly some racial bigotry which we
were talking about last night but partly
from Hoover sense the kings mores were
terribly unsuitable for a leader in this
country I don't believe that there's any
you know standpoint that is correct and
I'm not suggesting that but I'm
suggesting that Hoover had a strange
Victorian sense amores and had decided
to use that against King and I think
that's one things that McAdams didn't
want to get into in public II if the
attitudes with Hoover expressed
privately about King's personal life one
of the things that was brought out
yesterday was the disclosure that the
FBI had a stand-in for
in the wings that if they could somehow
knock came from his pedestal this and
then this man which step forward and
become the new martin luther king do do
either of you know who that person was
when i have some i have some leads on it
Paul but I don't I don't know myself at
this point apparently if somebody who's
very obscure who was quite surprised
himself when I offer without I was a lot
of night approached also in other words
this was somebody they've collected on
reputation and on paper and on paper and
he's never been approached to fuzzys now
Adams also claimed today that the FBI by
and large was aboveboard and its
dealings with the press that is dealt
honestly with newspaper men and
television correspondent have you found
that to be true I think they've been one
of the greatest minutes I think they've
been one of the greatest manipulators of
the press in Washington a work when I
first came here enormously so they had a
habit for instance of what they called
friendlies and I once worked for an
organization that was well regarded by
the girl i'm giving you private briefing
which were quite advantageous over your
competitors but sometimes dangerously
contain inaccurate information and you
could be badly used if you ran with it
right away they know how to reward the
press that was favorable film and as we
learned today to no comment publication
that mr. Hoover decided we're going to
criticizing and it was a very effective
one of the cases was New Haven you may
recall in well I guess is nineteen
seventy Kent State's weekend as a
demonstration in New Haven and several
members of the press were told by
friends are there isn't borough that
they were guns being brought in the city
and we were given a terribly strong
ideas what would happen none of that
happened we later determined by
comparing notes that we have been the
victims of a of a kind of a cointelpro
the hope of reducing the number of
crowds if we wrote stories of terrible
violence coming forth I think so we're
lucky that our stories didn't get in but
sadly you've just written a book about
the FBI how cooperative is the FBI's
today well I think some of these things
have changed all I think the Bureau is
learning that
everybody can't be classified as a
friend or an enemy the way they once did
although I must say they still resort to
a few tricks like back about a year ago
and some of the first things were coming
out about Cohen tell crow and the bureau
was concerned that what was being said
they issued on plain white paper to some
reporters they thought they could trust
a few of the bureau's answers and the
hope that this would get into the
story's not indicating at all that had
come from the FBI I I've found on my
project which has spanned over a period
of two years that many of the younger
people in the bureau are really quite
eager to be cooperative to talk about
what they do to explain that it's not
everybody who's in security work and to
talk about how they feel about the
organization they've in the past always
demanded the right to review things that
people wrote material cooperation in my
case I made no such promise and I've had
their cooperation without having a
submitted a manuscript to them later so
I think that some things are changing
anyway I think we also ought to point
out the substantial number of agents
didn't agree with a good many things
that went on in Hoover's Bureau and some
of them laid their jobs on the line and
we're badly treated even after leaving
the jail because they're posting and you
cannot say that of the eight-thousanders
at 8,500 agency has now that they were
all eager to break the law I had in fact
call last night after we reviewed
yesterday testimony I had a call from
one age and I know who said look I can
tell you I never broke the law while
working for the FBI and this was a small
number of people who were engaged in
some of these activities and especially
people that Hoover knew we could count
upon at headquarters who helped dream up
these ideas and whom and who were
especially active in doing it most
agents I think many agents anyway prefer
criminal investigations but they'd like
to be in some of the heart rate is the
crucial question today it seems to me he
was suggesting that someone like Martin
Luther King or or someone of of his
eminence could survive the kind of
harassment which they received from the
FBI but what about the average Joe
potatoes
I think he's in trouble I do story once
on a professor Starsky the University of
Arizona was a victim of COINTELPRO
because he's in the Socialist Workers
Party and it took him years to find out
what happened to him because a rarely
letter to the academic board exact
democratization was with threatening he
really didn't know where it came from he
didn't have the facilities of people in
Washington is mr. King big who finally
told him you're a victim of zero that's
right when you when you look back over
mr. Adams his testimony today its avowed
what was done to Martin Luther King but
he was unrepentant on many other areas
he did not say that the bureau should
not have investigated various other
people should not have done some of the
things to give to lower level people in
civil rights groups from the south for
example and he was given the opportunity
to disavow more than he did and he held
back from doing it well that's fairly
true do you think that that that during
this period the FBI really had a hang-up
about communism or was it reflecting the
temper of the time what their members of
Congress for example who really secretly
applauded many of the things which sure
the FBI was doing well I think to some
extent that's true mature Adams listed
off those groups that were in mr.
Hoover's appropriations testimony it was
right there on the record they said they
were investigating these people I think
that as far as the Communist Party was
concerned certainly at the beginning in
the early years of what the bureau was
doing to the Communist Party many people
would have applauded them I think maybe
the beautiful autumn really in fact the
McCarthy was both a friend of the
bureau's and they were friend of it as
they had a variety of information and he
supplied them accolade it may just be
the bureau sort of lags behind the times
of this that they continue doing this a
long time that's the village of public
support that may be a political sense by
the way you notice that Hoover finally
about 1956-57 begins to get a sense that
this country attitudes are changing and
the reason I gotten is their worst
trouble is the late portion of
COINTELPRO the stuff in the 69 70 71 is
because just like the Vietnam War the
people didn't want that any long
and that's when it began to run into
serious trouble even before the recent
exposure suits and other kinds of cases
did you find Adams persuasive and
arguing that law enforcement agencies
must always maintain huge Dodgers a
large files collect all kinds of
information even if a lot of it is
invaluable well I think they're some
your flaws in that argument the problem
is that if there's a false allegation
about you Paulie FBI files even if it's
shown to be faulted it remains there to
be called up time and again if you're
ever named do it to a job which requires
that you be investigated and I think
that that's too bad why should rush him
from haas allegation be brought up again
one of us the right way to escape
humorous quarterly report or several
months ago with the mr. Kelly once
explained to a House committee but they
couldn't destroy it because Larkins law
which prohibits the destruction decision
doesn't government document but they're
clearly on very weak ground there and
there haven't really scrub their
computers designer sense let's move
ahead five to ten years and ask the
question could it happen again could
there be new movements more to spend in
this country that could revive all of
this once more Nick yes I think it could
happen anytime I think that kind of a
reversal is what the church committee
has got to deal with it's got to work
out some way of protections in the
features so that we don't have things
like for example the Baltimore women's
liberation movement being investigated
and infiltrated by the FBI and that's
where we're coming back to our
guidelines situation or our laws weather
whatever the guidelines Paul I think
it's awesome going to depend on the
people and as long as you have say
Richard Nixon in the White House and
John Dean is white House Counsel and
John Mitchell as attorney general or
Jagger Hoover's FBI director the
guidelines might not mean anything many
of the same people could are still in
the bureau now could be in the bureau
five or 10 years from now and if they're
offended then by beards and
nonconformity and the people of Antioch
College or women's lib group why not so
it could happen again that's what we
that's what we agree on
unfortunately well talking of well
talking of talking about the Baltimore
episode involving the women there the
senators today certainly did not
overlook the women's lib disclosure in
their questioning senator Church chided
the FBI and mr. Adams for concentrating
its energy on what he viewed as a
disgraceful example of muddle-headed
monitoring of legitimate citizen
activity his real concern was that the
names of the women would remain forever
more in those FBI files as innocent
victims of domestic spying fine what do
you what now in this case of this kind
what do you do in to you still carry
that you say this has been closed the
apparently the women's liberation
movement is no longer under suspicion by
the FBI and the case has been closed
what happens when the case is closed
although all those woman's name still
left in the files or they are they
forever more contained and in the yes in
the system but yes there's no yes yes
pretty soon we'll have us all in the
system I mean if there's no way even
after surveillance has been terminated
to terminate the references of
individuals through the files of the
system you one day have us all won't you
well i would say that as part of a
normal business records when we do make
a judgment that an organization should
be investigated and we investigated and
then we find activities but we make a
conclusion that
no additional problem here this is a
record of our official action now if we
destroy it at what point do we get into
a situation of being accused of doing
things and then destroying things to
keep from showing what we do the website
where real thing on this whether we are
able that we do set up safeguards where
information in our files is not an
issues at a later date and that's what
these guidelines committees are all
about well can you have have you any
idea how many how many names of
Americans you keeping your files all
told as a result of the cumulative
effect of all these surveillances and
the investigation no I don't you don't
it's a religion business we have six and
a half million files you have six and a
half million files yes and and and there
are surely lanes of more than one person
in it typically in a file aren't there
but it is a rather large country we have
well that's a large number of files to
start with and if you have multiple
names and then we're quickly up into the
into the mess you know 20 30 40 million
right but many of these files are
applicant files they're not all
subversive files they're not all
criminal files we have a million crimes
of violence each year there's a million
people or and I'm I wish you had more
time to spend on those crimes of
violence attitude well there were a
great length but what I worry about is
this you say there's no way to know when
to close the file these are surveillance
files they were originally opened up for
to determine whether organizations might
have subversive connection there are
names in these files so some demagogue
comes along and says against some public
figure that his name is contained in a
certain file that is to be found in the
subversive files of the of the FBI and
there it is he hasn't made in this
statement at all but to the American
people that man name and reputation has
been scarred and i hope this committee
record
is that and recommends legislation that
would enforce strong punitive or
criminal violations against misuse of
information in the files we feel this
way it's BIA feels this way we recognize
we have a lot of sensitive information
in it we fire our employees if we find
the misusing information we feel we need
additional sanctions in this area I
don't think we can ever stop the
accumulation of information I don't know
an investigative agency in the world a
law enforcement agency that doesn't have
to accumulate information and we're
working on guidelines as to how to get
rid of the irrelevant information how to
eliminate material it really doesn't
need to be kept and we hope we'll be
able to come to Congress enough with
these guidelines before too long which
will help objectives after just some of
these problems well you may be assured
that the committee shares your your
objective in this regard and and we will
be working with you and with the
Department of Justice and others to try
and change the laws to give a greater
measure of protection to the First
Amendment rights of the American people
tomorrow the Senate committee turns its
attention back to the investigation of
the Central Intelligence Agency and will
release its long-awaited report on
political assassinations the report is
expected to provide some important new
details about American attempts to
undermine certain foreign governments
and their leaders the White House has
been deeply concerned about the report
and is tried to prevent its release
today CIA chief william colby called a
news conference to protest the reports
inclusion of a dozen man all persons
affiliated with the CIA in some fashion
and all implicated to some degree in the
assassination stories Colby suggested
there could be retaliation by what he
called certain
national groups with the US intelligence
efforts damaged in the process tonight
President Ford himself has made a
personal appeal to the committee to
delete the name the committee previously
agreed to drop some names the Chairman
church is saying it will stand firm
against any more deletion accusing the
White House of an eleventh-hour attempt
is scuttled the committee's overall
investigation so as it now stands the
Senate meets tomorrow morning in an
unusual closed session to take up the
assassination report and we'll be back
tomorrow night here on public television
with a special program to give you the
full particulars the Sanford Unger and
Nick Hawk I'm palsy saying the night
from Washington
[Music]
bye
this program was produced by empire
invasion of weta which is solely
responsible for its content and was
funded by public television stations the
Ford Foundation and the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting
[Music]